Best 7800 ProSystem Palettes - Why The Shift Matters... - Trebor of AtariAge
SOURCE:
http://atariage.com/forums/topic/216065-best-7800-prosystem-palettes-why-the-shift-matters/

Why?  Technically the phase shift of the 7800 is ~25.7; actually, 25.714
according to the math here... https://sites.google...ari7800wiki/rgb (Thank you
Eric Ball). 

The reality though is most (all?) 7800 systems fluctuate the phase shift higher
as the system 'warms up'; additionally there is a variable resistor which also
impacts the ultimate end results.  The color references affected the most - and
consequently most noticeable - are values E$ and F$.

At the 25.7 setting colors 1$ and F$ match near exact.  To the naked eye they
in fact look exact.  According to the books this would be proper having a 180
degree color-burst resulting. 

However, even a new system I obtained within the last year does not stay at
that degree. There is a deviation from it, resulting in the shift going higher
than 25.7 degrees.  The question is how much greater do we go?

Simply stated, color F$ more realistically ends up between the hue of Color 1$
and 2$; darker than 1$, but lighter than 2$.

If we set the phase two degrees higher (27.7) we end up with colors E$ and F$
as a near exact match of colors 1$ and 2$.  Some systems, including one of my
own, phases this much and even higher (~28.7) over several hours (To the point
where E$ and F$ fall in between 2$ and 3$ in hue - and most other values almost
look like they have shifted a complete row less (I.E. 8$ starts to look like a
7$, 7$ starts to look like a 6$, etc.); but now that is swinging the pendulum
too far in the other direction.

So, if 25.7 is technically accurate, but hardly remains the reality, and 27.7
brings too much of a phase shift to the palette, then a happy medium would be
26.7.

Setting the phase to 26.7 we obtain a color F$ that is in between the hues of
color 1$ and 2$.  MESS, in fact, has F$ documented (Thank you Dan Boris) as a
'light orange' range, whereas 1$ is a 'gold' range and 2$ is a 'orange' range.
Additionally, we obtain light browns from 1$, while now having darker browns
set under F$.

Looking at color E$ under the 26.7 setting, it falls right as a 'pea soup', the
'Linda Blair special', puke-ish green throughout; placing it in between a green
and a brown color.  Going back to 25.7 causes E$ to become a stronger green on
the lower end, swinging the pendulum to 27.7 makes E$ a brown color. 

The often noted intension is for the E$ range to fall between a green and a
brown; it is arguably better achieved at 26.7.

The extensive work done in brightness, contrast, saturation with the literally
hundreds of palettes created and viewed across half dozen displays, along with
the input of the community, has helped achieved a nicely saturated and bright
palette setting from the base values.  That is easily adjusted and open to
interpretation of course, so if you want something more/less saturated,
brighter, etc...Just ask.

Additionally, the "BASE" palettes are being included for those who perhaps just
want the base values and/or like to self-adjust saturation, brightness,
contrast, etc.

Unlike the GCCFINAL palettes, we are not looking to factor in a wide range of
television tints or pot adjustments.  This palette presumes a properly
calibrated/pot adjusted 7800 and a television which falls within a neutral tint
setting - and expects similar from the monitor it is being displayed upon.

It's almost a certainty that programming color choices were made on systems
with a variety of phase settings as well.  For instance, some games like
Choplifter! and Midnight Mutants look better with a higher (27.7) phase shift,
but others like Pole Position II and Joust look better with a lower (25.7)
one.

Look at Choplifter! - 257 --> 267 --> 277:
Notice how much better the sky and ground appear with a system that phase
shifts higher.

Look at Joust - 257 --> 267 --> 277:
Notice how bad the enemy bird wings look with a higher phase shift.  They loose
their green.

Just to emphasize, the above are not utilizing any tint/hue control or
manipulation.  There is no manual changing of RGB values or proportions.  This
is not the same as a television display tint/hue control.  This comes strictly
from the console itself and is not a pot adjustment either.

*Note to 7800 game developers: Avoid color E$ like the plague!*

Interestingly enough, a 'perfect Fuji' (Enable the BIOS) demands
'257-PROSYSTEM' - and it is the technically accurate ideal, if not actually
experienced for a long duration of time.
*The differences are likely less noticeable on a CRT especially when animated,
but still worth noting*

If you have a system that truly sticks to a 25.7 degree shift, it's covered
here, as well as 26.7 degrees, up to 27.7 degrees.

*UPDATE 8/28: Received request for less saturated palettes. Lighter/less
saturated palettes have been added. 
Here are the corresponding NTSC and PAL charts for '267-PROSYSTEM-LT':

*UPDATE: 8/30: Fixed 257 palettes for both NTSC and PAL regions; data was badly
transposed in several areas.